Let's see, where were we?
We're talking about your book.
Playback to the last sentence.
The German antiquarian book business was decimated by, first of all, the Nazis themselves, who, of course, were...
sort of know-nothings and anti-culturalists, then by the immigration of the Jews, then by the bombing during the war, occupation, and then misery and no money for years.
And then as we know also how the Russians, the Soviets also took all the books, anything that was left,
Yeah, a lot, a lot.
They actually emptied out libraries, which we didn't do.
But anyway, still, but to my great surprise, I found out from a book, an auctioneer in Munich, Mr. Hartung, who is now 81, I believe,
They had book auctions in Munich in the 1940s, still, while the bombs were falling down.
They still had auctions in Munich, yes.
Who was going to them?
People continued to buy books.
Who was this man, Hartung?
Hartung, H-A-R-T-U-N-G.
And if you go to Germany, perhaps you could interview him, because he's got a long memory, and he also remembers my grandfather, Hartung, where his
Hans, I believe, and his son is Felix.
I'll give you the exact... Okay, and where are they, in Germany?
In Munich.
Okay, good.
Yeah, because Germany will be, I will be going to Germany.
Yes, and they, they, uh... Do they speak English, I hope?
Yes, most of them do.
Then, um, there was a wonderful man in Munich who, a former employee of my grandfather, Jacques, uh, by the name of Helmut, H-E-L-M-U-T,
Domizlaff, D-O-M-I-Z-L-A-F-F, Helmut Domizlaff in Munich, who was a bookseller who never issued a catalogue in his life.
He was more of a collector than a bookseller, but when I came back to Munich after the war to visit him, he remembered me, you know, in lederhosen and golden locks and, uh,
There was an immediate rapport established with him.
He was absolutely untouched by Nazism.
He was one of those people about whom you needn't have the slightest suspicion that they in any way collaborated or were Nazis or anything.
He suffered a great deal because he was a very sensitive man, very intellectual, and thank God he was drafted into the German army, and somebody succeeded in having him assigned to some typing pool in Bavaria during the war.
He was the first bookseller with whom we took up contact again.
I'll tell you a nice anecdote, but this I think would be better if you didn't quote it.
He knew me extremely well, as I said.
And one day he said, you know, Bernhard, he was one of the few people whom I allowed to use the H in the name.
He said, let me tell you something about your grandfather Jacques.
He said, I think he was an anti-Semite.
So I said, oh.
He said, yes.
He said, he never had a Jewish employee in a trade where, after all, there are so many Jews.
And so we had a good laugh about that.
And it's true.
It's true.
Never had a Jewish employee.
That doesn't matter.
That goes very deep.
I think that has all to do with the German Jews trying to
Assimilate.
I don't think it's relevant.
No, but it also shows you the openness and the friendship that we had.
And Domitsev died, unfortunately.
Before I interrupt you, Hartung was telling you about the bombs falling.
Yes, but that's all I know.
And I wanted, unfortunately, we didn't have much time, and I wanted him to tell me more, but he showed me some catalogs.
So there was something, there was some trade going on.
There was still this passion for books while the bombs were falling.
I see this chapter opening, it might change a thousand times, but I will try and get some contemporary accounts of these book burnings in Germany.
You want to talk about setting a scene and moving into it.
have these, you talk about the... 1935 was the first book.
There are accounts and people... Oh, yes.
I think I would just try and set that scene very visually and take it from there.
You can either go back and forth.
You have to set the scene for what's about to happen.
Quite a job.
Pretend you're a writer.
That's okay.
You'll do it.
I said that as much for my benefit there because I just thought of it.
I see.
Also in England.
I mean, just because there were some bombs dropping in London.
I mean, my brother, Albie, who started his business in 1936 in London.
Albie?
A-L-B-I.
Well, his name is Albrecht, but it's untranslatable.
It's not Albert.
And everybody called him Albie practically from the day he was born.
And so, and it's now official and has been for, really, 75 years, I think.
So anyway, and Albie is... This is an older brother.
Yeah.
He's, yeah, he'll be 81 this year.
Still full of beans and growing great guns.
And he's still working, opening?
Oh, yes.
Oh, yes, very much so.
Very much so.
Yes, he is the music dealer, the world's...
most recognized dealer in music, expert in music.
Maybe he'd like to talk to me as well.
I'm sure.
I keep telling him to do something and to write down, because he knew people that, for instance, he could give you a whole thing about the people in England, the Germans who went to England.
You'll tell me how to get in touch with him.
I certainly will.
And maybe you can pin him down.
He was interviewed by these Germans, too.
I'll send him a copy of my book.
That's how we start.
Okay.
Okay, but I talk to him practically every day.
But this guy who wrote this book would love to talk to him when I come to England, which he'll be sometime within the next time.
He makes the papers all the time.
He's a self-taught musicologist.
He's a good violinist, a self-taught musicologist, and he deals in rare music, chiefly.
But anyway, he started his business in London in 1936,
And he was bombed out, came to work one day, and the wall of the building was missing.
But the books, strangely enough, were still there, and they allowed him to go up on the rickety stairs and to save the books.
And then he moved to Oxford and continued.
I mean, you know, what's a few bombs?
He's both, but he lives in Oxford.
and has been living in Oxford since the 1940s.
And I used to go and see him, and I was in the most beautiful towns in the world.
Yes, when I was a GI, I was stationed in England for a while, and I'd go see him all the time.
We made a strange pair, you know, he was this typical English civilian, and I was an American private uniform.
I wouldn't think we were brothers.
Anyway, so...
But, of course, in England, the bombings were not as bad as what the Germans got.
And so, as I say, the German antiquarian book market was a desert or a heap of rubble like the cities.
And I think it's incredible how they managed to...
somehow rebuild this business.
It took 50 or 60 years, though, didn't it?
Well, yes, it took them a long time to get a ten shirt, but that has to do with the currency also.
But they had, also in the 50s already, there were some very remarkable booksellers in Germany.
Domitschlaff, of course, was the most important one, and he was the first president of the German association.
How would you spell his name?
Domitschlaff, D-O-M-I-Z-L-A.
He's the fellow that I mentioned.
Yeah, Helmut, yeah.
And so they had him, then they had some other people who, of course, worked under very difficult circumstances, but then the German universities and institutions all of a sudden got infusions of money again, and it's quite remarkable how they managed.
It used to be that if you wanted to buy incunables, you went to Germany.
Well, now it's the Germans who go to England to sort of restock.
And a lot of stuff is going back.
And that's incidentally a chapter which is, I think, very difficult to put your fingers on, but the flow of material back to Europe and to Japan.
Well, this is essential.
It is tremendous.
Tremendous.
I mean, I sell... If I have a really fine German item that is not represented in a German library, it'll be bought by a German library.
Oh, yes, absolutely.
And they will be fierce in their... Oh, yes, in their competition.
Yes, indeed.
And so are the Italians.
You see what happened with his Leonardo da Vinci notebook.
I was there.
That's right.
Yes, yes, yes.
I mean, you know, that's a lot of money.
They came prepared to spend $25 million.
That's right.
They just didn't know they were going up against Bill Gates.
Right.
Nobody knew.
Not even Steve Massey.
He didn't.
I was the one who questioned him at the press conference after the sale.
Yeah, you.
That's not in the book, but I questioned him.
And his superior said, all I can tell you is that it's a quarter.
And that was that.
But then the story broke.
It's not a collector.
Well, he's not a collector, but why do you suppose he bought it?
Okay, I have to start with one of Barney Rosenthal's great predictions.
I made a number of such predictions.
People would say, what do you think it'll bring?
They'd say, I'll tell you, it won't sell.
Because, yes, I was convinced that this would not sell, because obviously it must have had a reserve of about $10 million.
And I said, there is no collector in the world that I know
that is willing to spend $10 million for a book, for this book.
And I was right, because this was not a collector.
This was an intelligent, wealthy individual who knew what this was all about.
Neither were the Italian bankers, collectors.
They just wanted for Italy.
And I thought this acting won't sell.
I was standing there with Bart Orbeck, and who walks by, but Lou Weinstein.
Yes.
So I said, OK, Lou, what's it going to go for?
He was leaving.
He says, oh, 10.5, he says, 10.5 million.
And he's standing right there five minutes later, $28 million, $30.5 million.
So much for experts.
And the advances were in million-dollar increments.
Yeah, imagine that.
For a 72-page book, a beautiful, and it's more than a book, of course.
It's a unique manuscript.
But how do you explain, then, that the Louisiana Purchase,
Didn't find a buyer for a million dollars.
And as Hanni Krauss said, and we were talking, because that was the day before the sale, she said, you know, Barney, for this country, that's much more important than the Leonardo da Vinci manuscript.
And somehow, she was right.
I mean, it didn't find a buyer.
It was bought by Jefferson.
Yeah, and they gave him hell for spending so much money.
That's right.
No, but I mean this Louisiana Purchase document at Christie's.
Oh, I think I'm talking about that.
Oh, I see.
Okay, this document, the Louisiana Purchase document at Christie's.
That didn't sell?
That was bought in?
It was bought in, and then I have to know that it was bought in.
I didn't know what you were talking about there.
Oh, I see.
I've been in a fade here.
That didn't...
that was that was the engelhardt document yes is that what you're talking about that was brought in it was bought in but it was then sold it was then sold and you can ask steve massey i don't want to say i know but uh if he wants to reveal it but it was bought by a couple of dealers yeah yeah speculation then whatever yeah
Would you know what they paid for it, off the record?
Off the record, $750,000, including commission.
How could that?
The document that opened the West.
How is that possible?
See, that's a very interesting point.
Why is that, do you figure?
Why wouldn't the Smithsonian Institution try to get it?
I thought that this should bring between $5 and $10 million.
Maybe because there's another copy in the archive somewhere.
I don't know.
Well, is it a printed thing?
No, no, no.
A lot of it is manuscript.
So it's the actual document.
Yeah, it's the actual document, or maybe an official copy of something.
I don't have the... But it's a fantastic Americana.
And, uh... Yeah, it's amazing.
I don't know where we're going on that.
So, anyway.
Yeah.
So, in a way, you see, Gates is not a collector, I think, in that sense, or a bibliophile.
Oh, he's certainly not.
I'm sure that he collects.
No, no, no, he's not.
But he's gathering things, and what his intentions are, are really very, nobody knows.
Yeah, right.
I think it's part of this, he's digitized.
He bought the Bettman Archive.
Yes.
I told you I'm going to be seeing Otto next month.
Very interesting.
I called him.
He must be a remarkable guy.
Yes, he sounds so lucid and clear, and he's in a retirement home.
Yeah.
And I said, what day is good?
He says, I'm here all the time.
He's coming.
Right.
I'm looking forward to your arrival.
Yeah.
But, you know, he was a special collections librarian and lip-sig, I guess.
Really?
Yeah.
I don't know his background at all.
Well, I just started looking it up, and so he's going to have a
He'll fit in later in the book.
You know, you do hundreds of interviews, and then they kind of walk around.
You know what is amazing about the, I think I also say that somewhere, but it's worth emphasizing how none of the bookseaters went back.
You know, they could have.
I mean, these refugees who came here, they would have been received in open arms in Germany, and probably would have also had government subsidies and all that.
They all stayed.
Well, they'd made a new life, hadn't they?
Yeah, that's right.
And it was agreeable.
Yeah.
And life went on.
But also, amid the rubble, the booksellers, their businesses were destroyed.
Didn't this also open up extraordinary opportunities to bring material to the states and stuff for the emigres?
I mean, they still knew where to go.
And people desperately needed money to sell material.
I think, without mentioning any names, I think some of them took advantage of that.
They went to Germany and bought things for cartons of cigarettes.
But that didn't last very long, because the German dealers were, of course, totally cut off from the international market and had no idea about international prices.
And so a lot could be bought very cheaply, indeed.
However, it was also a time, you have to think, that in the 40s, it wasn't so easy to sell an early continental book in this country, yet.
Now, we're talking about institutions as well as private collectors that are buying, right?
Indeed.
And what do you think prompted this interest, finally, in this country and this material?
Just that mainly that it was available?
I mean, I wonder.
Well, I think that library schools turned out more sophisticated librarians.
I think that some of the European academics who were teaching here got their librarians to get this material.
And maybe a lot of these are
Librarians and curators were also people who edited them.
Not a lot of them, but some of them were.
One of the main examples of that would be Rudolf Hirsch, H-I-R-S-C-H, who was the son of a famous German bookseller, Emil Hirsch, who also came here
Yeah, there is Emil Hirsch from Munich.
And Emil Hirsch's son, Rudolf, became a librarian, first at the New York Public and then at the University of Pennsylvania, very influential.
For instance, he bought lots of medieval manuscripts and continental 15th and 16th century books.
But he is sort of
the only obvious examples I can think of.
Think of how this strengthens American institutions, though.
And Roger says, you know, our stuff is as good as anybody's now.
And it's an interesting statement.
Of course, Harvard, you know.
They were blessed by a succession of librarians and donors that were just
Every one of them exceptional, including Roger, who is really an exceptional person.
And, you know, I have seldom seen a librarian, if ever, that has this kind of encyclopedic knowledge that he has.
He knows everything.
It's disgusting.
I usually see him every six months or so.
And he'll listen to me.
And he'll just listen.
Then he'll get up.
get a book and read it down, and try to get a look at that.
Of course, it's exactly what you write more, and it's telling you something you absolutely didn't know.
It's almost embarrassing, you know?
Well, and I think that also, possibly, that after World War II, America became more of an international and European, Europe-oriented power.
and I think Fulbright scholarships.
When you think of all this tremendous flow back and forth of people coming here from Europe and Americans going to Europe to study and all that, that probably also must have had some kind of influence on this.
Largely, this deals with institutional collections, I guess, but are there any private collectors you can think of whose collections really became spectacular by virtue of this?
Well, yes.
Um, one of them is Kim Brooker in Chicago.
Oh, for sure.
I don't know who he is.
But Kim, of course, let's see, he came to see me— But he's more recent now.
He's more recent.
He came to see me in New York when I just began in the 1950s.
He came to see you in the 50s.
Yes, he came to see me in the late 50s.
Uh, but he was already then a collector.
I would have to think about it.
I think that, for instance, another collector in Chicago, Abel Berland.
I'm seeing him.
I'm talking to the Caxton Club out there.
Are you?
In May.
Good.
He was the one who invited me.
You asked him.
He wanted me to come see his books.
You've got something.
Do you know Chef Louis Zafmari?
He's in my book.
Who is that?
Chef Louis Zafmari, the chef.
Oh.
The bakery.
You probably wouldn't know him, but he's in my book.
You'll see him.
I don't want to.
I'm curious to read your chapter on Manny, which I have now.
Anyway, but Abel, well, I want to compare the two because as far as I know, I never sold Manny anything.
There it is.
Two hundred and fifty cents.
Okay, we're talking what, Burlington?
Come on now, are you working?
Go ahead, you spoke to a class of Terry Bell and just... Yeah, and I emphasize the fact that, you know, this... This is a Lucien Goldschmidt lecture, which is a little bit too much like, you know...
the good old days, but then, this is my little autobiographical search.
Okay.
This is running again, so go ahead.
I think maybe there's a little bump on the tape.
I can't think of any, well, of course, Rosenwald.
If you talk about really major collectors, there must have been quite a few that were, you know,
How about people like Otto Schaeffer and people like that in Europe?
Well, Otto Schaeffer, of course, Breslauer was one of his main suppliers.
But that's a different chapter now.
That's over there, yeah.
Right, yeah.